This page describes how to install and use Hoogle locally.

### Database Creation

Hoogle has both binary databases (extension .hoo) and textual databases (extension .txt). Textual database files are a list of functions and their types, along with information about type synonyms, instances etc. The textual database files can be generated by [http://haskell.org/haddock/ Haddock] with the <tt>--hoogle</tt> flag. Support for this is now in [http://haskell.org/cabal/ Cabal] with <tt>runhaskell Setup haddock --hoogle</tt>.

A more detailed tutorial style style post on database creation is available [http://neilmitchell.blogspot.com/2008/08/hoogle-database-generation.html on the author's blog].

You can create some default databases with:

 $ hoogle data

#### Converting text databases to binary databases

A text database can be converted to a binary database with the command <tt>hoogle --convert=file.txt</tt>. Any package dependencies should be specified with <tt>+package</tt> or <tt>--data=package.hoo</tt>, and will require the binary databases for those packages. The output file can be controlled with <tt>--output=file.hoo</tt>.

#### Merging binary databases

Multiple binary databases can be merged with <tt>hoogle --combine=file1.hoo --combine=file2.hoo</tt>. As before, <tt>--output=default.hoo</tt> can be specified.

The following script (from Matt Brown) may be helpful:

```
#!/bin/bash

function combines {
  for f in ~/.hoogle/*.hoo
  do
    echo -n " $(readlink -f $f)"
  done
}

hoogle combine --outfile=$(readlink -f ~/.hoogle.hoo) $(combines)
```

Simon Michaels suggests: 

```
#!/bin/bash
#
# Search for hoogle databases in or under the directories/files specified
# as arguments or hard-coded below (see allHoogleDbs), and combine them as
# ~/.hoogle/default.hoo.  Lets you search all your code (and installed
# haskell libs) at once.
#
# Usage:
# $ hoogle-update-db
# $ alias hoogle="hoogle --i=$HOME/.hoogle"
# $ hoogle something

# nb current hoogle cli quirks: path options should have two hyphens, one
# equals, and no tildes, eg: --d=NOTILDEFILEPATH

#set -x

ARGS=$*

function allHoogleDbs {
 for p in $ARGS ~/src/ ~/.cabal/share/ # add paths here
 do
     echo -n " $(findHoogleDbs $p)"
 done
}

function findHoogleDbs {
 find $1 -name '*.hoo'
}

function combineOpts {
for f in $*
do
 echo -n " $(readlink -f $f)"
done
}

dbs=$(allHoogleDbs)
echo Found $dbs
mkdir -p ~/.hoogle
hoogle combine --outfile=$(readlink -f ~/.hoogle/default.hoo) $(combineOpts $dbs)
echo Created ~/.hoogle/default.hoo
```

### GHCi Integration

Ever feel like having access to hoogle whilst messing around in GHCi? It's relatively easy to integrate the two. 

The following will install hoogle as a shell command, and configure GHCi to have a command ":hoogle":

* <tt>cabal install hoogle</tt>
* <tt>echo >> ~/.ghci ':def hoogle \x -> return $ ":!hoogle \"" ++ x ++ "\""'</tt>

NB. the above wraps the argument in quotes before passing to the shell command, so there is no need to supply quotes; eg.

    :hoogle map
    :hoogle (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]

Done!

On Windows you should add the same line
 :def hoogle \x -> return $ ":!hoogle \"" ++ x ++ "\""
to file (XP/2003):
 C:\Documents and Settings\[your windows account]\Application Data\ghc\ghci.conf 
or(Windows Vista/7):
 C:\users\[your windows account]\Application Data\ghc\ghci.conf 

 
#### Installation from source (without cabal)

First, you need to download and compile Hoogle. Then, we want to move hoogle to somewhere in your system's <code>$PATH</code> (open a terminal and type <code>echo $PATH</code> to see where this is). I suggest ~/bin, although you might want to go for /usr/bin or /usr/local/bin, etc.

Copy the Hoogle binary and hoogle.txt to the directory you chose. If you're using a version of hoogle pulled straight from darcs, you can ignore everything up until the 'Next, we need to integrate it into GHCi' bit. Otherwise:

There's a problem in that hoogle doesn't look for hoogle.txt in the system <code>$PATH</code>, it only looks in the current directory. This is a slight pain but is easily worked around: rename the hoogle binary to hoogle-bin, then create a new text file called 'hoogle' with the following contents:

 #! /bin/bash
 hoogle-bin -l /path/to/your/chosen/directory/hoogle.txt "$@"

chmod hoogle to make it executable (try <code>chmod +x hoogle</code>). Now you should be able to run hoogle requests from the shell. Try a few of the examples above.

#### How it works

Next, we need to integrate it into GHCi. We can execute shell commands with GHCi via <code>:def</code>. Load up GHCi, and type the following:

 :def hoogle \x -> return $ ":!hoogle " ++ x

If this executes cleanly, you should be able to run hoogle commands from GHCi via <code>:hoogle</code>, i.e. <code>:hoogle map</code> or <code>:hoogle "(a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]"</code>. Be careful: you need the extra quotes when hoogling types, at least on my system. <code>:ho</code> works as an abbreviation of <code>:hoogle</code> (just <code>:h</code> clashes with <code>:help</code>).

Finally, we want to make this persist across GHCi sessions. GHCi loads a file called ~/.ghci before running, so simply stick the above <code>:def</code> in that file and all should work.

Contributed by [[User:DavidHouse|DavidHouse]]

### Emacs Integration
[[Haskell_mode_for_Emacs|haskell-mode]] from versions 2.4 onwards have the function haskell-hoogle, which will hoogle the identifier at point. Setup:

```
(require 'haskell-mode)
(define-key haskell-mode-map "\C-ch" 'haskell-hoogle)
;(setq haskell-hoogle-command "hoogle")
```

You will need a web browser configured for best results. Here's an example setup for Safari:

```
(setq browse-url-browser-function 'browse-url-safari)
 (defun browse-url-safari (url &optional new-window)
  "Open URL in a new Safari window."
  (interactive (browse-url-interactive-arg "URL: "))
  (unless
      (string= ""
               (shell-command-to-string
                (concat "open -a Safari " url)))
    (message "Starting Safari...")
    (start-process (concat "open -a Safari " url) nil "open -a Safari " url)
    (message "Starting Safari... done")))
```

Alternately, you can build the command-line hoogle (darcs repo below) and uncomment the third line above, then results will appear in a buffer.

### The Source Code

<tt>$ darcs get http://code.haskell.org/hoogle/</tt>

Contributions are most welcome. Hoogle is written in Haskell 98 + Heirarchical Modules, I do not wish to change this. Other than that, I'm pretty flexible about most aspects of Hoogle. The [http://code.google.com/p/ndmitchell/issues/list bug tracker] has many outstanding tasks, but please contact me if you have thoughts on doing something major to Hoogle, so I can give some advice.
